I also wanted to mention that if
you want just a collection of state
machines that you just want to look at for
inspiration or
see how other people are modeling
their application logic.
There is a registry at
stately.ai/registry with a ton of
different machines, for example,
here's an offline queue.
And so this is going to
open in the visualizer and
just show the machine over here.
So that you could look at it and
just really understand
what's going on especially by
playing around with the machine,
sending events and seeing what happens.
So I recommend you take
a look at the registry,
there's also xstate-catalogue,
the British spelling.com.
And so in this catalog there
are a bunch of, I guess,
handpicked state machines where
they're actually described for you.
So anything that you might want to do,
such as creating a multi-step form,
is in the catalog.
And so it talks about just the different
states that it could be and
the different events that can happen.
And basically, it gives you an overview
of how you would model a state machine in
order to accomplish whatever tasks you
might want to do in an application.
So I definitely recommend you
check out the xstate catalogue and
the xstate registry.
Also, you can go to
stately.ai/biz at any time for
just playing around with state machines
and you can save them as well.
You just log in via GitHub, and then your
machines are accessible when you log in.
So yeah, we're gonna be coming out with
a lot more tools in the future too.
The one that I'm most excited about
is a visual state machine and
state chart editor.
Where just like I've been
doing in ExcaliDraw for
this whole workshop instead I could do
in a state machine editor that makes it
easier to create these state machines and
export them directly to code.
And also integrate them with your existing
state machine code in your applications.
>> We've talked from the beginning
about given when then syntax, and
then you just showed model based I
think it's really cool that you can
iterate through all those paths.
Would there be a pro and
con of that versus vanilla Cucumber?
If you wanted to write that and then have
some other mechanism writing in plain
English with the given when then like
you started out and having it maybe use
Puppeteer or Cypress to interact with
machines for integrated testing?
>> So the question was about using
these given when statements instead
of just a model based testing approach
where you find it all in one.
And honestly both of them are pretty much
one in the same, you can do it either way.
You could have separate
given when then tests or
you could represent it
all as a test model.
So the test model in model based
testing is basically all of those
given when then specifications
combined into one machine.
So instead of saying on a,
if b then c and on a if c then d and
on b if e then g,
it's just represented as one model where
you could derive all of the given when
then statements from that state machine.
So they're really one and the same.
And especially if you don't want to
code that state machine up front,
then you can just continue to
use Cucumber given when then and
create all of those test statements.
And then later, take a look at
each of those specifications and
put them into a state machine so
that you can merge all of them together.
And I think that that's actually
a really good technique and
a good way of organically
discovering how you can model
your application with
these specifications.
In fact,
I think Bob Martin talked about how these
specifications are essentially
a state machine anyway.
So it's just different ways of
writing the same state machine.
What are your recommendations for
model based testing with state
machines that use actors?
So one way you could do this
is you can mock the actors.
But what I also recommend is
if you go to the Xstate repo,
which is @statelyai/xstate, if you look at
the test files, and we look@actor.test.ts.
You're going to see an example of
just the different ways that you can
test these actors.
So something I'd like to do is when
testing the actors I just make sure
that when we test them that the actors
either respond immediately or respond
with something that doesn't require any
outside interaction with the actor.
And basically, I'm testing in
my parent state machine that it
eventually reaches a final state or
that it reaches some specific state.
And what's great about this is that I
can call onDone in interpret, and so
this is a callback that's called when this
machine reaches its top level final state.
And so, I know if I reach
that top level final state,
then the interaction between the state
machine and the actor was successful.
So yeah, it's just a really
easy way of testing that.
But in general, you can mock actors,
and that's something that I'd
recommend unless you're doing
integration testing, then yeah.
Again, if you have a direct
reference to that actor,
which you do in state.children, or if
you're spawning in state.context directly.
Then you can send events to that actor
to sort of coerce it to behave in
a certain way and send events
back to the parents potentially.
All right,
there was a good question in the chat,
can context be serializable or
can you store anything in context?
So unofficially,
you can store anything in context.
And especially in just practical
use cases, I love using maps and
sets and custom data structures, things
that are not really directly serializable.
So serializability is really important for
when you're actually
using developer tooling.
So that you can take
that initial context and
you can present it in a way
where you can ship it as JSON or
maybe even converted to SC XML somewhere.
And these target locations really don't
have a way of understanding a map or
a set because there's no way
to serialize them cleanly.
However with xstate inspect,
we are coming up with a new way
to serialize custom context.
So even if you have custom data
structures like maps and sets you should
be able to tell the serializer, I want
to serialize these in this specific way.
So that in the developer tooling,
it's shown either as null or
as just the string map, or
just as a custom data structure that is
serializable and that you can
understand in the developer tooling.
So in short,
put whatever you want into context, but
just keep in mind when you're
using developer tools,
that machine definition is sent over the
wire to whatever inspector you're using.
And it needs to show that somehow,
and obviously JSON and
JSON serializable things are the easiest
way for the inspector to do that.
Today, we covered a lot.
We talked about software modelling event
driven architecture, and the why behind
using state machines and state charts
to describe your application logic.
We went over the fundamental parts of
state machines and state charts and
how to use them effectively
in your application logic,
especially to improve it in a natural
way and an easily visualizable way.
We also talked about the actor model and
how it's important to
conceptually view your app as different
actors talking to each other,
just for a proper separation of concerns.
And we talked about other topics as well,
such as using state machines for
things other than implementing your
application logic like testing your app.
And just some developer tooling that
you can use to make state machines
that much more useful in your application.
I hope that you surmounted the learning
curve of XState and learned about state
machines and state charts and how useful
they could be in your application.
And I wanna thank you all for
joining this workshop.